Stress is actually essential for life.
In fact, we would die if we had no
stress in our body and we wouldn't grow
without stress. So, there are some kinds
of stress that we really need and
there's some kind of stress that tears
us apart. And in this video, I sit down
with a woman and I talk to her about
those different kinds of stress, how to
recognize them in her body and how to
work with them so that you can
prioritize the stress that helps you
grow and not be torn apart by the stress
that doesn't. Along the way, you'll also
be invited to do some experiments so you
can feel what it's like in your body
right now.
So, imagine I have a button right here.
And if you push this button, you will
never feel any more stress for the rest
of your life. Zero, none,
nothing. Would you push the button?
Right? That's the thing is nobody would
push that button. And the reason is
something in us knows that we would be
dead. And I don't mean kind of dead. I
mean like immediately, instantly dead,
right? There is stress that our heart
feels in every beat. There is stress
that our lungs feel in every breath.
There's a a tension that comes with
life. There is no form of life that is
alive that doesn't feel some form of
tension, some form of stress, some some
form of resistance and then letting go
and contracting and letting go and
contracting.
So, there's something that's amazing
about stress and something horrible
about stress. Kids who are really
stressed out have a hard time learning.
We know organizations that are stressed
out get burnt out. We know that stress
doesn't make us think very well. It puts
us into black and white thinking. It
makes us less likely to problem solve,
less likely to be able to be creative.
There's all sorts of things. If you
think about why big bureaucracies have a
hard time being creative, it's because
everybody's always under stress. And so
that's not good. At the same time,
no growth has happened without stress.
No change has happened without stress.
No transformation has happened without
stress. So there's something beautiful
about stress. There's something that we
can't do without when it comes to
stress. We can't even be alive without
that stress.
[Music]
In this experiment, you're going to find
the difference in your body between
stress that deteriorates you and stress
that helps you grow. So, I want you to
go back into your memory and go to the
place where you felt most stressed out
in a way that you knew was bad for you,
that was not serving you, and find that
memory where it was super stressful and
and just corrosive.
and put this in your body. Note that
this is the way stress feels when it is
corrosive, when it is hurting you, when
it is stopping you from growth.
Okay, take a deep breath. Shake it off
for a second.
And now close your eyes again.
Deep breath in and go to a memory where
you grew, where you had just like an
amazing amount of growth in a short
period of time.
And how does that stress feel in your
body?
So let your body know the difference. So
now whenever you're out in the world and
you feel these different kinds of
stress, your body knows the difference
between these stresses.
Some of this is based on tolerance.
Meaning I can run not as long as you can
run. You're you can run much longer than
I can run. your body has practiced.
There's all sorts of things that you've
done that make it that you can run
longer. But I can probably play pickle
ball longer than you can play pickle
ball without getting wiped out. And so
there's a a thing that happens around
stress that can allow stress to be
different in our systems. Stress for the
stress of pickle ball to me isn't
destructive. The stress of pickle ball
to you if you played it for a long time
would be destructive. your knees or your
ankles or something would start giving
because I've built up some muscles to
it. So, you can't even get to say,
"Okay, the it's the right amount of
stress that's good for you and the right
amount of stress that's bad or the wrong
amount of stress that's bad for you."
You can't determine what the good amount
of stress is from anything besides
the way that it feels in your system at
the moment and if it's pushing you into
destructive behavior or if it's pushing
you into growth behavior.
So there's a sense a felt sense of
stress in your system that feels like
growth
and there is a felt sense of stress that
feels deteriorating.
And then you can intellectually get
above that and look and see, oh well, if
it is growth, I'm doing things that
aren't creating shame when I'm under
stress.
Oh, I just did this thing. I'm under
stress. I just did this thing and I
don't feel any shame. That's growth.
I'm under stress. I'm doing this thing.
It's created some shame. It's doing I'm
doing things that I'm not proud of,
right? I'm repeating a pattern. I'm
doing a bad habit. I'm I'm uh doing
anything that makes me feel like I'm not
as good or that I I don't want to do it
or I shouldn't do it or why did I do
that or regretting that all that stuff.
That's when stress is deteriorating. So,
it's not really about how much stress,
it's about how your system is handling
the stress. And the way that I think
about it is that there's no way to get
rid of stress in life. There's you can't
do it without dying, but you can hold it
ever more gently.
So, right now in your system, there's
stress. You can feel it.
There's stress in my vocal cords talking
to you. There's a little stress in the
words that I'm saying. I'm not saying
all my words like this, right? There's a
little stress. How gently can I hold
that stress?
How much am I resisting the stress?
Right? It's it's in every it's just oh
there's going to be stress there's no
way I can talk without some stress but
how gently can I hold the stress that's
the question and as you are thinking
about oh is this creating shame or is
this creating growth the opportunity
that increases your capacity like your
capacity to run or my capacity to play
pickle ball is how gently you can hold
the stress the felt sense of gently
holding the stress
in In this experiment, we're going to
see what it's like to hold stress
gently.
And so, don't let your mind get too
confused in this. It's just a sematic
thing of holding gently or holding
really, really tightly.
So, feel stress.
Any stress you have in your system, any
stress that you're holding from the day,
if you can't find any stress that's big
enough, go into some issue that you're
having in your life. remember it and let
that stress start kicking up.
And first thing I want you to do is just
hold it as tightly as you possibly can.
Like really hold on to that stress
really really tightly.
And now take a breath in
and see what it's like to hold that same
stress. Don't try to change the stress,
but hold that same stress just as gently
as possible.
Just it's there. It's hanging out. And
you're just being
very gentle in your holding of it.
And now go back to holding it as tightly
as possible. Tightly as possible.
And now as gently as possible,
just super tender with the stress. Just
here you are. I got you.
That's the difference in your body
between holding stress tightly and
holding stress gently.
Our two kids, they were second one had
just been born. We hadn't had enough
sleep in gez whatever it was. And my
wife and I were fighting constantly at
this point. We're justah
super stressed out and we were what's
wrong with the marriage? What do we have
to do? Counseling, you know, what's is
it this about me? Is it this about her?
What's happening? We were just in this
thing. And uh I think it was a friend of
ours was like, "Oh, we'll take care of
the kids and one of you can go to a hot
springs." And and I got to go first. I
don't know how I got so lucky. And I I
uh slept I think for
I think it was like 18 hours straight
the first night and 14 hours the second
night, just dead to the world. And when
I came back, my wife went and she slept
the same amount. And then we came home
and there wasn't any problems in the
marriage anymore. And it blew me away
because we had always thought about if
there's any problems in the marriage,
it's because something's going on
emotionally or psychologically.
It was just about sleep. There was no
actual problem in the marriage. And then
I started really paying attention to
this about stress. Oh, if I'm stressed,
is it because of the thoughts that I'm
having? Is it because I'm not having
enough sleep? Is it because I am
emotionally overwhelmed? And that's when
a whole another set of patterns showed
up, especially when it comes to work.
What I noticed is when I was working
really hard and I would feel overwhelmed
by that, fully stressed out by how much
I had to do. If I had a big cry or if I
got angry or I had frustration, I
release some emotion. All of a sudden,
it wasn't I found out it wasn't about
having so much to do. the next day I'd
be doing the same stuff and I wouldn't
be stressed out. Or I would find out,
oh, it's it's not about my stress. It's
about I'm I I'm in a culture where I
need to be stressed to seem relevant or
to look like I'm doing my job. So, the
emotional release became another way
that I realized, oh, what I think I'm
stressed about isn't actually what I'm
stressed about. And what I notice is
when we get stressed, we tie it to
something and say this is the thing that
that we're stressed about, but actually
we haven't investigated that fully. We
haven't done the experiments to say,
"Oh, how can I find what I'm actually
what is the underlying stress?" And so
one of the most important things that
you can do when you feel that stress and
you're like oh I want to I want to
address the stress is to start
investigating what could be all the
possibilities that is the main culprit
in creating that stress.
[Music]